>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, AUGUST 28:
THE U.S. REACHES A TARGET OF
RESETTLING 10,000 SYRIAN
REFUGEES THIS YEAR.
AS REFUGEE CHILDREN FROM AROUND
THE WORLD PREPARE FOR THE FIRST
DAY OF SCHOOL IN NEW YORK CITY.
>> I HAVE MANY FRIENDS.
WE PLAY TOGETHER.
I LIKE HERE.
IT'S VERY GOOD.
>> Sreenivasan: AND, A
DISCUSSION ABOUT FREE SPEECH
WITH AN EDITOR WHO
CONTROVERSIALLY PUBLISHED
CARTOONS OF THE PROPHET
MOHAMMED.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE UNITED STATES THIS EVENING
IS ON THE VERGE OF A MILESTONE.
TOMORROW THE U.S. WILL MEET
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S TARGET OF
RESETTLING 10,000 REFUGEES FROM
SYRIA'S CIVIL WAR BY THE END OF
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S FISCAL
YEAR ON SEPTEMBER 30.
THAT'S ACCORDING TO THE AMERICAN
AMBASSADOR TO JORDAN.
AMBASSADOR ALICE WELLS MET TODAY
IN AMMAN WITH SOME OF THE
SEVERAL HUNDRED SYRIANS ABOUT TO
LEAVE TO START NEW LIVES IN THIS
COUNTRY.
THE RESETTLEMENT PROGRAM HAS
BECOME AN ISSUE IN THE
PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN, WITH
REPUBLICAN NOMINEE DONALD TRUMP
CHARGING THE REFUGEES POSE A
POTENTIAL SECURITY THREAT.
BUT AMBASSADOR WELLS SAID SYRIAN
REFUGEES ARE SUBJECTED TO
RIGOROUS SCREENING MEASURES
CONDUCTED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF
HOMELAND SECURITY, THE STATE
DEPARTMENT, AND THE F.B.I.,
WHICH INCLUDE IN-PERSON
INTERVIEWS AND A REVIEW OF
BIOGRAPHICAL AND FINGERPRINT
INFORMATION.
THE PROCESS USED TO TAKE 18 TO
24 MONTHS BUT SINCE APRIL HAS
QUICKENED TO THREE.
FOLLOWING REFERRALS FROM THE
UNITED NATIONS REFUGEE AGENCY,
JUST OVER HALF THE APPLICANTS TO
THE U.S. ARE APPROVED.
AN ESTIMATED FIVE MILLION
REFUGEES HAVE FLED SYRIA SINCE
THE CIVIL WAR BEGAN THERE FIVE
YEARS AGO-- THE MOST GOING TO
TURKEY, JORDAN, LEBANON, AND
GERMANY.
TURKEY'S INVOLVEMENT IN THE
SYRIAN WAR INTENSIFIED TODAY.
TURKISH TANKS AND WARPLANES
POUNDED POSITIONS CONTROLLED BY
A REBEL KURDISH MILITIA
SUPPORTED BY THE UNITES STATES.
TURKEY SAYS 25 KURDISH MILITANTS
WERE KILLED, WHILE A HUMAN
RIGHTS MONITORING GROUP SAID AT
LEAST 35 VILLAGERS ALSO DIED IN
THE ATTACKS.
TURKEY HAS SAID IT IS JUST AS
CONCERNED ABOUT CURBING KURDISH
EXPANSION IN SYRIA AS IT IS
ABOUT FIGHTING ISLAMIC STATE
MILITANTS THERE.
SEARCHERS IN EARTHQUAKE-
DEVASTATED CENTRAL ITALY SAY
THEY BELIEVE THEY'VE LOCATED
MORE BODIES IN THE RUBBLE OF
HARD-HIT TOWN OF AMATRICE, BUT
ARE UNABLE TO REACH THEM.
NO SURVIVORS HAVE BEEN FOUND
TODAY IN THE WAKE OF THE
WEDNESDAY QUAKE STRUCK WHICH
KILLED AT LEAST 290 PEOPLE.
ITALIAN PROSECUTORS HAVE OPENED
A BUILDING-CODES FRAUD AND
NEGLIGENCE INVESTIGATION AFTER
SOME BUILDINGS COLLAPSED ONLY A
FEW YEARS AFTER THEY HAD
UNDERGONE COSTLY RENOVATIONS TO
WITHSTAND EARTHQUAKES.
MUSEUMS ALL ACROSS ITALY ARE
DONATING TODAY'S TICKET SALES TO
THE RECONSTRUCTION EFFORT.
AT THE VATICAN, POPE FRANCIS
PRAYED FOR THE VICTIMS AND SAID
HE PLANS TO VISIT THE EARTHQUAKE
ZONE AS SOON AS POSSIBLE.
GERMANY'S ECONOMY MINISTER GAVE
A THUMBS-DOWN TODAY TO THE
ONGOING FREE-TRADE TALKS BETWEEN
THE UNITED STATES AND THE
EUROPEAN UNION.
SIGMAR GABRIEL, WHO'S ALSO
GERMANY'S VICE-CHANCELLOR, SAID
THAT WHILE NO ONE IS WILLING TO
ADMIT IT, TALKS OVER THE
TRANSATLANTIC TRADE AND
INVESTMENT PARTNERSHIP HAVE
FAILED.
GABRIEL SAID THAT IN 14 ROUNDS
OF TALKS OVER THREE YEARS, THE
E.U. AND THE U.S. HAVE BEEN
UNABLE TO AGREE ON A SINGLE
ITEM.
HE SAID EUROPE IS REFUSING TO"
SUBMIT" TO AMERICAN DEMANDS.
CHICAGO POLICE HAVE ARRESTED TWO
MEN FOR THE SHOOTING DEATH OF
NYKEA ALDRIDGE-- A COUSIN TO
N.B.A. STAR DWYANE WADE-- AS SHE
WAS WALKING WITH HER BABY NEAR A
SCHOOL ON FRIDAY.
BROTHERS DARWIN SORRELLS JUNIOR
AND DERREN SORRELLS ARE CHARGED
WITH FIRST-DEGREE MURDER FOR
THEIR STRAY GUNFIRE THAT STRUCK
ALDRIDGE IN THE HEAD AND ARM.
POLICE SAY THE SUSPECTS WERE
FIRING AT A THIRD MAN AND THAT
ALDRIDGE, A MOTHER OF FOUR, WAS
NOT THE INTENDED TARGET.
HER CHILD WAS UNHARMED.
AS OF LAST WEEK, CHICAGO HAD
RECORDED 2,228 SHOOTINGS,
INCLUDING 441 HOMICIDES THIS
YEAR, AN INCREASE OF NEARLY 50
PERCENT FROM THE SAME PERIOD OF
TIME LAST YEAR.
YESTERDAY, REPUBLICAN
PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE DONALD
TRUMP SPARKED CONTROVERSY WHEN
HE TWEETED THE SHOOTING WAS
PROOF THAT AFRICAN-AMERICAN
VOTERS WOULD VOTE FOR HIM.
ON C.B.S. TODAY, TRUMP CAMPAIGN
MANAGER KELLYANNE CONWAY WAS
ASKED WHAT HE MEANT.
>> HE'S BEEN TRYING TO MAKE THE
CASE THAT THE INCREASE IN RANDOM
CRIME AND SENSELESS MURDERS, THE
POVERTY, JOBLESSNESS,
HOMELESSNESS IN SOME OF OUR
MAJOR CITIES, IS UNACCEPTABLE TO
ALL OF US.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ARE
SCIENTISTS SAYING ABOUT THE
DECREASE IN THE NUMBER OF
EARTHQUAKES IN OKLAHOMA?
FIND OUT ONLINE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
IN THE PHILIPPINES, IN THE TWO
MONTHS SINCE PRESIDENT RODRIGO
DUTERTE TOOK OFFICE WITH A
PROMISED CRACKDOWN ON ILLEGAL
DRUGS, THE NATIONAL POLICE SAY
THEY HAVE GUNNED DOWN MORE THAN
700 SUSPECTED DRUG DEALERS AND
USERS WHO RESISTED ARREST.
MORE THAN 1,000 OTHER POLICE-
INVOLVED KILLINGS ARE UNDER
INVESTIGATION.
THE WAVE OF EXTRAJUDICIAL
KILLINGS HAS BROUGHT
CONDEMNATION FROM HUMAN RIGHTS
GROUPS.
JOINING ME FROM SAN FRANCISCO
FOR SOME INSIGHT INTO THE
VIOLENCE IN THE PHILIPPINES IS
PAUL HENSON, THE NORTH AMERICAN
BUREAU CHIEF OF THE FILIPINO
CHANNEL.
THANK YOU FOR JOINING US.
ARE PEOPLE IN THE PHILIPPINES
WHO VOTED FOR THE PRESIDENT NOW
BECOMING CONCERNED ABOUT THE
LACK OF DUE PROCESS?
>> THERE IS A GROWING CONCERN,
BUT LET ME PUT IT IN CONTEXT,
FIRST.
THE PRESIDENT, HE WON THE LAST
ELECTION BY A MARGIN OF ABOUT
SIX MILLION OVER HIS STRONGEST
COMPETITOR, THIS IS THE
POPULATION THAT IS TIRED OF
CRIMINALITY IN THE PHILIPPINES
THAT WANTS CHANGE.
I GUESS WHAT PEOPLE WEREN'T
EXPECTING WERE THE METHODS THAT
THE GOVERNMENT IS WILLING TO
UNDERTAKE IN ORDER TO STAMP OUT
CRIME AND CORRUPTION IN THE
STREETS.
THERE IS GROWING CONCERN RIGHT
NOW THAT DUE PROCESS IS INVOLVED
THAT THOSE SUSPECTED OF BEING
INVOLVED IN THE DRUG TRADE ARE
NOT BEING RESPECTED IN TERMS OF
THEIR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS TO
DUE PROCESS.
AND THERE IS ALSO FEAR THAT
INNOCENT PEOPLE, MAY BE INVOLVED
IN THE KILLINGS.
AND THIS COLLATERAL DAMAGE AS
WELL, ONE OF THE RECENT
COLLATERAL DAMAGES OF THE A
5-YEAR-OLD GIRL WHO WAS GUNNED
DOWN BY MOTORCYCLE-RIDING GUNMEN
WHO WERE TARGETING HER
GRANDFATHER WHO WAS ALLEGEDLY
INVOLVED IN DRUGS.
THERE ARE INNOCENT PEOPLE
INVOLVED IN THIS ALL-OUT
CAMPAIGN THAT'S WHERE THE FEAR
IS COMING FROM.
>> Sreenivasan: PUT IT IN
CONTEXT FOR AN AMERICAN CONTEXT,
HOW BIG IS THE DRUG PROBLEM IN
THE PHILIPPINES?
>> THERE'S BEEN A RECENT STUDY
BY THE AGENCY THAT NINE OUT OF
TEN, THAT'S 9 2% OF LOCALITIES
OR VILLAGES IN MET TOE MANILA
HAVE DRUG RELATED CASES.
THAT'S ONE OUT OF FIVE
LOCALITIES THAT IS A VERY BIG
CHUNK OF THE POPULATION OF THE
PHILIPPINES.
THERE'S ALSO BEEN A STUDY BY THE
UNITED NATIONS THAT THE
PHILIPPINES IS NUMBER ONE IN
TERMS OF THE USE OF
METHAMPHETAMINE HYDROCHLORIDE
THE NUMBER ONE IN EAST ASIA.
A LOT OF THIS PROBLEM IS REALLY
BOOSTED BY POVERTY AS WELL AS
UNEMPLOYMENT IN THE PHILIPPINES.
AND THE BIG E PROBLEM IS THAT
THE DRUG MONEY AND CORRUPTION
SEEPED IN TO THE GRASS ROOTS
LEVEL BUT ALSO IN LAW
ENFORCEMENT AMONG JUSTICE
OFFICIALS, IT'S A PROBLEM OF
NARCO POLITICS AS WELL.
>> Sreenivasan: HE FAMOUSLY
GAVE A NATIONAL SPEECH WHERE HE
CALLED OUT JUDGES, HE CALLED OUT
MEMBERS OF CONGRESS AND SAID
THESE ARE PEOPLE THAT ARE
ASSOCIATED WITH THIS.
HAS THIS CRACKDOWN ACTUALLY
NABBED SOME OF THE BIG FISH THE
KING PINS THAT ARE BRINGING THE
DRUGS BOOT PHILIPPINES?
>> THAT'S WHAT THE PEOPLE ARE
LOOKING OUT FOR, BECAUSE THIS
NUMBER, THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE
BEING KILLED, IT'S AMOUNTING TO
AROUND 1,900 NOW IN TOTAL THESE
ARE STREET CRIMINALS, THESE ARE
PETTY PUSHERS AND DRUG USERS.
WHAT THE PEOPLE WANT TO SEE ARE
MORE OF THE SYNDICATE LEADERS
AND THE BIG BOSSES TO BE
APPREHENDED AND PUT BEHIND BARS.
THAT IS WHAT IS CAN LACKING
STILL IN THIS CAMPAIGN.
>> Ninan: WHAT ABOUT THE SORT
OF CIVIL SIGHT HOW ARE THEY
PUSHING BACK?
>> WELL, THERE'S BEEN A BIG
PROTEST RALLY IN THE LAST TWO
WEEKS, PEOPLE ARE REALLY
CONCERNED ARE TAKING OUT TO THE
STREETS TO AIR THEIR GRIEVANCES
SAY THAT THIS EXECUTIONS ARE NOT
RIGHT, EVEN THE VICE PRESIDENT
OF THE PHILIPPINES WHO COMES
FROM THE OPPOSING PARTY HAS SAID
THAT THIS IS NOT RIGHT, THAT
PEOPLE SHOULD SPEAK UP AND MAKE
THEIR VOICES HEARD.
>> Sreenivasan: PAUL HENSON
OF THE FILIPINO CHANNEL, THANKS
SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH, MY
PLEASURE.
>> Sreenivasan: WHEN THE DANISH
NEWSPAPER "JYLLANDS-POSTEN"
PUBLISHED A DOZEN CARTOONS OF
THE PROPHET MOHAMMED IN 2005,
INCLUDING ONE DEPICTING THE
PROPHET WITH A BOMB IN HIS
TURBAN, IT STIRRED OUTRAGE IN
THE MUSLIM WORLD.
PROTESTERS SET FIRE TO DANISH
EMBASSIES, AND THE PAPER'S
CULTURE EDITOR AT THE TIME,
FLEMMING ROSE, WAS THE TARGET OF
AN ASSASSINATION PLOT.
ROSE WAS IN NEW YORK RECENTLY
AND I SAT DOWN WITH HIM TO
DISCUSS THOSE EVENTS, THEIR
IMPACT ON FREE EXPRESSION, AND
THE DIFFERING VIEWS ON FREE
SPEECH AROUND THE WORLD.
IS FREE SPEECH ABSOLUTE?
>> NO, I DON'T THINK SO.
I THINK THE UNITED STATES, IN
FACT, YOU HAVE THE BEST POSSIBLE
PROTECTION OF SPEECH ANYWHERE IN
THE WORLD, THE FIRST AMENDMENT.
BUT OF COURSE, ANYWHERE IN THE
WORLD, ALSO THE UNITED STATES
YOU DO HAVE LIMITATIONS ON
SPEECH.
I THINK THE KEY THAT ANY SOCIETY
WOULD NEED IS CRIMINALIZATION OF
INCITING OF VIOLENCE, I DON'T
THINK ANYONE SHOULD HAVE RIGHT
TO INCITE VIOLENCE.
AND CALL ON CITIZENS TO CALL UP
TO KILL OTHER PEOPLE.
AND THERE IS A DIFFERENCE IN THE
UNDERSTANDING OF SOCIETY TO ADD
IN THE U.S. AND IN EUROPE, IN
THE U.S. YOU NEED A CLEAR AND
PRESENT DANGER, THAT IS WORDS
SHOULD BE FOLLOWED BY IMMEDIATE
ACTION.
IN EUROPE YOU CAN BE CONVICTED
OF INCITING VIOLENCE EVEN THOUGH
MAY NOT BE A RISK OF IMMEDIATE
ACTION FOLLOWING WORDS.
PERSONALLY, I AM MORE INCLINED
TO FAVOR THE AMERICANS
INTERPRETATION.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU'VE
WRITTEN IN THE PAST ABOUT THE
DISTINCTION BETWEEN WORDS AND
DEEDS.
IN SOME WAYS THAT WE SOMETIMES
LIMIT SPEECH BECAUSE WE EQUATE
SPEECH WITH ACTUAL ACT.
>> YES.
THAT IS EXACTLY WHAT DICTATORS
DO.
AND WHY DO DISSIDENTS BEHIND THE
IRON CONSIDER TON END UP IN
LABOR CAMPS BECAUSE THEIR
CRITICISM OF THE GOVERNMENT WAS
BEING SEEN AS ALMOST PHYSICAL
ATTACKS ON THE GOVERNMENT.
THAT THEY WERE UNDERMINING THE
SOCIALIST IN SOCIALIST EUROPE.
AND IF YOU GO BACK IN HISTORY,
IT WAS CHURCH BASICALLY, WITH
THE SENSOR SHIP.
THE CHURCH PERCEIVED ANY
CRITICISM OF RELIGION OR THE
CHURCH AS A PHYSICAL ATTACK AND
YOU HAD THE RIGHT TO KILL PEOPLE
WHO BURNED ON THE STAKE OR --
AND KILLED THEM FOR OTHER MEANS.
AS SOON AS YOU BEGAN TO
DISTINGUISH BETWEEN WORDS AND
DEEDS, FIRST YOU WORKED OUT A
DOCTRINE THAT MEANT THAT PEOPLE
OF OTHER FAITHS HAVE THE RIGHT
TO LIVE AND PRACTICE THEIR
FAITH.
EVEN THOUGH IT WASN'T THE
MAJORITY FAITH AND LATER ON YOU
ARE ALSO STEP BY STEP THE RIGHT
TO DIFFERENT SPEECH.
DISTINCTION BETWEEN WORDS AND
DEEDS IS IN FACT CRUCIAL AND IT
IS A DISTINCTION BETWEEN LIB
BALANCE DEMOCRACY AND A
DICTATORSHIP SCREEN UNDER YOUR
BROAD DEFINITION OF DEFAMATION
OF CHARACTER I'M SURE YOU'RE
CRITICS HAVE TRIED TO POINT OUT
WASN'T INVITING THE CARTOONS A
DEFAMATION OF A RELIGIOUS
CHARACTER, WASN'T IT ALMOST AN
INCITEMENT OF OTHER PEOPLE TO
RISE UP AGAINST THIS KIND OF --
DID YOU KNOW THIS WAS GOING TO
HAPPEN?
>> NO.
AND THAT'S ONE OF THE REASONS
WHY I'M LOOKING AT THIS ISSUE IN
THE WAY I DO.
I MEAN, I DID NOT HAVE ANY BAD
INTENTIONS OR ABOUT CENSORSHIP
WHEN IT COMES TO ISLAM AND THERE
WERE ARTISTS, TRANSLATORS,
WRITERS, WHO WERE SUBMITTING
THEMSELVES TO CENSORSHIP AND
SOME PEOPLE WERE SAYING, NO,
THIS IS NOT THE CASE, THAT WAS
THE CONTEXT IN WHICH THOSE
CARTOONS WERE COMMITTED TO START
A DEBATE ABOUT THIS AND TO TEST
IF THERE WERE CENSOR SIP IS IN
FACT OR NOT.
AND SECONDLY, THERE WAS BASED IN
FICTIONAL FEAR OR IN REAL FEAR.
TEN YEARS LATER I WOULD SAY THAT
WE HAVE TO ANSWER THOSE
QUESTIONS IN THE AFFIRMATIVE,
YES, THERE WAS CENSORSHIP AND
THAT'S UNDERSTANDABLE BECAUSE
PEOPLE HAVE BEEN KILLED.
I MYSELF HAVE BODYGUARDS AROUND
THE CLOCK.
SO, THE FEAR IS BASED IN RE
REALITY.
>> Sreenivasan: AREN'T
PUBLICATIONS ALREADY SELF
CENSORING ON A WHOLE HOST OF
ISSUES?
THIS MIGHT BE TOO GRAPHIC, TOO
VIOLENT FOR OUR AUDIENCE, THIS
IS SOMETHING THAT I DON'T WANT
TO SHARE, JUST THAT EDITORIAL
ACT AND SAYING COLLECTIVELY IN
THE NEWSROOM OR INSTITUTION,
THIS IS NOT WHAT WE'RE GOING TO
PUBLISH.
THOSE ARE ACTS, RIGHT?
>> YES.
THE FACT THAT YOU HAVE A RIGHT
TO PUBLISH SOMETHING DOESN'T
MEAN IT'S ALWAYS PRUDENT AND
WISE TO DO SO.
BUT THE FACT OF THE MATTER IS
THAT I THINK YOUR NEWS PROGRAM
AND THE NEWSPAPER WHERE I WORK
AND OTHER NEWSPAPERS AROUND THE
WORLD, THEY PUBLISH THINGS THE
THAT OFFENSIVE TO SOME PEOPLE
OUT THERE EVERY DAY.
THE PROBLEM IS, THAT IT'S ONLY
BECOMING A CHALLENGE WHEN PEOPLE
REACT IT TO IN A VIOLENT WAY OR
THEY START TO THREATEN AND
INTIMIDATE.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU'VE
PROBABLY DONE A HUNDRED
INTERVIEWS WITH INSTITUTIONS ALL
OVER THE GLOBE, EVEN THE
INSTITUTION THAT YOU'RE SPEAKING
WITH NOW, WE'RE PROBABLY
UNLIKELY TO AIR THE IMAGES OF
THE CARTOONS IN QUESTION, RIGHT?
ARE WE PART OF THE PROBLEM OR WE
SELF CENSORING OR LIVING IN
CULTURAL FEAR OR AS YOU SAID,
PRUDENT FOR INSTITUTIONS TO MAKE
THIS CHOICE ON WHETHER OR NOT
THE IMAGE NEEDS FOB ASSOCIATED
WITH THE STORY.
>> I WOULD SAY AFTER THE KILLING
OF MY FRIENDS, I THINK IT WOULD
HAVE MADE SENSE TO SHOW VIEWERS
OR READERS WHY THEY WERE KILLED.
WE ARE NOW JUST HAVING A GENERAL
CONVERSATION ABOUT FREEDOM OF
EXPRESSION, I DON'T THINK
NECESSARILY THAT THAT REQUIRES
TO SHOW THE READERS THAT PART OF
MY STORY.
BUT IF YOU HAVE VIOLENCE, WHY
WERE THESE PEOPLE KILLED, I
WOULD SAY AS AN EDITOR THAT IT
WOULD BE RELEVANT, THAT IT WOULD
MAKE SENSE TO SHOW THE AUDIENCE
WHY THEY WERE KILLED.
THERE IS NO AUTOMATIC
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE
PUBLICATION OF THOSE IMAGES AND
THE VIOLENCE.
BETWEEN THE IMAGE OF THE
VIOLENCE THERE ARE INDIVIDUALS
WHO HAVE -- THEY ARE NOT
ANIMALS, THEY ARE NOT SMALL
CHILDREN, THEY ARE ABLE TO MAKE
A QUALIFIED JUDGMENT ABOUT HOW
TO REACT.
AND I THINK TREAT THEM AS ADULTS
NOT AS SMALL KIDS OR ANIMALS
WITHOUT AN ADJUSTMENT.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR MOST
STUDENTS ACROSS THE COUNTRY, THE
FIRST DAY OF SCHOOL IS RIGHT
AROUND THE CORNER.
AND HERE IN NEW YORK, THERE IS
AN ACADEMY THAT HAS SPENT THE
LAST SIX WEEKS HELPING A UNIQUE
GROUP OF CHILDREN PREPARE.
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S IVETTE
FELICIANO HAS THE STORY.
>> Reporter: THIS SUMMER, 118
STUDENTS, FROM AGES FIVE TO 20,
ATTENDED THE "REFUGEE YOUTH
SUMMER ACADEMY," KNOWN AS
RYSA, HERE IN MANHATTAN.
>> I LIKE RYSA TEACHERS!
>> YOU GET TO LEARN MORE ABOUT
DIFFERENT THINGS YOU DON'T KNOW.
>> I HAVE MANY FRIENDS.
WE PLAY TOGETHER.
I LIKE HERE.
IT'S VERY GOOD.
>> Reporter: THIS YEAR'S CLASS
HAILED FROM 29 DIFFERENT
COUNTRIES-- STRETCHING ACROSS
SOUTHEAST ASIA, THE MIDDLE EAST,
RUSSIA, AFRICA, AND LATIN
AMERICA.
ALL OF THEM COME FROM FAMILIES
WHO HAVE BEEN GRANTED ASYLUM OR
REFUGEE STATUS IN THE US, SOME
OF THEM FLEEING CIVIL WAR, GANG
VIOLENCE, AND NATURAL DISASTERS
IN THEIR HOME COUNTRIES.
THE INTERNATIONAL RESCUE
COMMITTEE STARTED RYSA 17 YEARS
AGO TO PREPARE THESE STUDENTS
FOR THE NEW YORK CITY PUBLIC
SCHOOL SYSTEM.
DURING THE SIX WEEK PROGRAM,
THEY GET A TASTE OF AMERICAN
SCHOOL LIFE, TAKING NOT JUST
ENGLISH AND MATH CLASSES, BUT
ALSO DANCE, MUSIC, ART, AND
PHYSICAL EDUCATION.
RYSA DIRECTOR KIRA O'BRIEN SAYS
ACCLIMATING TO A FOREIGN SCHOOL
SYSTEM IS JUST ONE OF MANY
HURDLES REFUGEE CHILDREN FACE.
>> THINGS LIKE LANGUAGE, THINGS
AS SIMPLE AS WHICH DIRECTION A
LIGHT FLIP SWITCH GOES.
THESE ARE THINGS THAT WE MIGHT
ALWAYS TAKE FOR GRANTED, BUT
KIDS ARE LEARNING ABOUT EVERY
SINGLE TIME THAT THEY STEP
OUTSIDE OF THEIR APARTMENT, THAT
THEY GO ONTO A SUBWAY.
THEY'RE ALWAYS LEARNING
SOMETHING NEW.
>> Reporter: 18 YEAR OLD BINTA
DIALLO ARRIVED FROM THE WEST
AFRICAN NATION OF GUINEA THREE
YEARS AGO.
AT THAT TIME, EVEN SETTING FOOT
OUTSIDE HER FAMILY'S NEW
APARTMENT WAS DIFFICULT.
>> WE DON'T KNOW WHERE WE'RE
GOING.
EVERYBODY FEEL VERY SAD.
LIKE, KNOWING THEY LEFT
EVERYBODY IN THEIR COUNTRY AND
THEN CAME HERE.
>> Reporter: SHE ENROLLED IN
RYSA A MONTH AFTER ARRIVING AND
SAYS THE PROGRAM HELPED HER MAKE
THE TRANSITION.
>> MY FIRST SUMMER HERE WAS,
KIND OF LIKE LITTLE BIT NERVOUS.
BUT WHEN I GET HERE, I SEE LIKE,
I SEE WHITE, BLACK, A LOT OF
PEOPLE.
NOBODY, LIKE, FEEL LEFT OUT.
HERE, LIKE, WE WERE LIKE, AS A
FAMILY, EVERYBODY CARES FOR EACH
OTHER.
>> Reporter: O'BRIEN SAYS RYSA
PROVIDES REFUGEE AND ASYLEE KIDS
WITH AN ENVIRONMENT WHERE THEY
CAN BOND WITH STUDENTS FROM
DIFFERENT BACKGROUNDS.
>> I HAVE FRIENDS!
SHE'S MY FRIEND!
I HAVE MANY FRIENDS!
>> IT PROVIDES THEM WITH A
COMMUNITY OF LIKE-MINDED
STUDENTS, RIGHT.
THAT THEY ARE NOT ALONE IN THIS.
IN THEIR CLASSROOMS THEY MIGHT
NOT HAVE ANOTHER STUDENT THAT
SPEAKS THEIR HOME LANGUAGE OR
KNOWS WHAT, KIND OF, FOOD THEY
EAT AT LUNCH OR KNOWS WHAT A
HIJAB IS.
IT'S WHEN YOU BUILD A COMMUNITY
OF STUDENTS WHO ARE LIKE, "HEY,
I'VE DONE THAT, TOO."
OR, "I FELT THAT WAY AT LUNCH
TIME BEFORE," THAT YOU ARE
REALLY BUILDING STRENGTH WITHIN
STUDENTS.
THAT THEY KNOW THAT EACH OTHER
ARE OUT THERE.
>> Reporter: THAT COMMUNITY HAS
BEEN HELPING 16 YEAR OLD BIKASH
SHRESTHA, WHO MOVED HERE FROM
NEPAL THREE MONTHS AGO.
>> THEY ARE SO TOTALLY AWESOME.
THEY WERE SAYING EVERYTHING WITH
ME AND I'M SAYING EVERYTHING
WITH THEM.
HOW THEY CAME TO, LIKE, NEW
YORK.
WHY THEY CAME.
AND HOW IS THEIR COUNTRY?
AND WE'RE SHARING ABOUT OUR
CULTURES.
FOOD.
TRADITIONS.
EVERYTHING.
IT WAS NICE TO MEET THEM.
IT WAS MY PLEASURE TO MEET THEM.
>> Reporter: DIALLO PARTICIPATED
IN THIS SUMMER'S PROGRAM AS A
COUNSELOR ASSISTING TEACHERS
WITH YOUNGER STUDENTS.
SHE SAYS RYSA HELPED BRING HER
OUT OF HER SHELL.
HOW DID YOUR EXPERIENCE HERE
HELP YOU TRANSITION TO YOUR
NORMAL SCHOOL?
>> HERE, LIKE, BE ABLE TO
COMMUNICATE WITH PEOPLE.
I JUST WANTED, LIKE, TO BE ABLE
TO BE USED TO COMMUNICATE WITH
OTHER PEOPLE.
SO I ALWAYS CHOOSE, LIKE, TO SIT
WITH PEOPLE.
SOME OF THEM DON'T EVEN SPEAK
ENGLISH.
BUT WE ALWAYS FEEL LIKE LISTEN
AND LAUGH.
>> Reporter: O'BRIEN SAYS THE
SMALL TRIUMPHS OF MAKING FRIENDS
OR ASKING QUESTIONS ARE CRUCIAL
PART OF STUDENT DEVELOPMENT.
>> WE HAVE HAD OTHER STUDENTS
WHO HAVE SAID THEIR FIRST WORDS
IN ENGLISH WITH US.
THEY'RE NOW WRITING, YOU KNOW,
FULL SENTENCES.
KIDS WHO ARE COMING IN AND
ASKING QUESTIONS, SHOWING US
THAT THEY ARE ENGAGING.
IT MIGHT SEEM, LIKE, MINISCULE
THAT A KID RAISES THEIR HAND.
BUT THAT KID COULD HAVE BEEN
WORKING UP TO THAT FOR THE PAST
THREE WEEKS.
SO WE REALLY WANT TO CELEBRATE
THAT.
>> "YOU ARE NEVER ALONE. WE ARE
WITH YOU AND WE BELIEVE IN YOU."
>> Reporter: THIS MONTH, RYSA
HELD A GRADUATION CEREMONY FOR
ITS 2016 CLASS.
THE NEW YORK CITY PUBLIC SCHOOL
YEAR BEGINS NEXT MONTH.
>> I BELIEVE SO STRONGLY THAT
OUR KIDS NEED THIS.
AND IF WE'RE GONNA HAVE AN
EDUCATION SYSTEM THAT REFLECTS
OUR CITY AND WHO WE HAVE HERE,
WE HAVE TO HONOR THAT.
>> THE RYSA IS AN-- BEST PART OF
MY LIFE.
AND I NEVER GONNA FORGET ABOUT
THIS PROGRAM.
I THINK I'LL COME NEXT YEAR TOO
FOR HERE.
>> Sreenivasan: FROM ONE WEEKEND
BROADCAST TO ANOTHER, CHARLES
OSGOOD ANNOUNCED TODAY THAT
SEPT. 25, THAT EDITION OF CBS
SUNDAY MORNING WILL BE HIS LAST.
OSGOOD IS 83 AND HAS HOSTED
THE HIGHLY RATED SHOW SINCE
1994, WHEN HE SUCCEEDED THE
LATE CHARLES KURALT.
HE'S RETIRING AFTER ALMOST
HALF A CENTURY ON TV WITH CBS
BUT HE'LL STILL SEE YOU ON THE
RADIO.
ON THE "NEWSHOUR" TOMORROW, WITH
AMY WALTER, THAT'S IT FOR THIS
EDITION OF PBS WEEKEND, I'M HARI
SREENIVASAN, THANKS FOR
WATCHING.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.